A Thousand Leaves (1998)

Three long years were to pass before Washing Machine’s successor, A Thousand Leaves, saw the full light of day, the longest interval that Sonic Youth's punishing work ethic had ever allowed them to leave it between album releases. What then, you may ask, had the band been up to in the intervening period? Well, aside from using the time to focus their energies more fully on the domestic sphere the group had been busy building their own studio with the proceeds of their 1995 headlining slot at Perry Farrell's neo-hippie fest Lollapalooza. This brand new recording set-up offered the group unprecedented freedom in putting down their musical ideas and eventually led to them releasing a whole slew of experimental records around the turn of the millennium, the SYR series. The effects of this new, more settled state of affairs are also conspicuous on A Thousand Leaves with the band sounding more at their ease than ever before, although never so much at their ease that they'd risk getting complacent -- they were way too self-conscious to ever let twenty years of impeccable hip go to waste just like that.  

Imagewise the late 90s were an interesting time for Sonic Youth, and for Kim and Thurston in particular. After two decades of domestic stability and successful artistic collaboration the couple had come to exemplify the Gen-X ideal of the carefree (domesticated) bohemians about town. You know the sort, trawling around antique markets of a Sunday morning in some quasi-gentrified part of town with brood fully in tow, on the hunt for 70s jazz vinyl and ironically-aesthetic pop culture detritus (and you have to remember that all this was a few short years before overly negative connotations to the word “hipster” went on to poison that particular well for the foreseeable).  Moreover, they represented the notion -- one that is by now hilariously quaint but that rang false even back then if your background wasn't sufficiently privileged to begin with -- that if you tried hard and really kept at it, you too could make it in a creative profession without having to compromise your ideals, that it needn't end up with you living embittered and alone in your mother's basement well into your 40s. You only need to look at the depth of generational trauma that Kim and Thurston's split eventually ended up triggering in order to appreciate something of the extent to which they had taken on the status of aspirational figures, with a glamour and an appeal that went far beyond the relatively small demographic cohort of alternative music fans. It became therefore ever more crucial for Sonic Youth's music to maintain its edge in order for the band to head off any impression of being overly comfortable and self-satisfied. Hence the SYR series which was to include the notorious, critic-baiting 'Goodbye 20th Century' as well as with the continued move away from their early 90s output on their more 'mainstream' albums. And so it is that A Thousand Leaves takes up the meandering approach characteristic of Washing Machine -- except that this time round the band seem to be in even less of a rush to get anywhere, like, anytime soon. The urgency of their earlier stuff has been largely forgotten and has been replaced by a preference for indulging in a sort of breezy aural doodling, a stripped-down guitar-y scrawl. 

Album opener 'Contre Le Sexisme' sounds uncannily like Nurse With Wound -- so much so that I had to check whether I'd hadn't put on the wrong record by mistake -- which is an odd state of affairs even for a band as supposedly out there as Sonic Youth. Fortunately the album segues quickly into Sunday just before things start to get too weird. The latter track features Sonic Youth at their most overtly Velvets-ian. More specifically it falls, influence wise, somewhere in between the third, eponymous, Velvets LP and Loaded, even if it's sorely lacking in the easy, gossamer charm so characteristic of those two albums. For all that, it’s not a bad track by any means, even if it will have been spoiled in many people’s minds by the grotesque promotional video featuring a sadly out of sorts Macaulay Culkin. Now Music journalists are wont to criticise Kim Gordon’s campy and frequently (badly) out of tune vocal performances on a Thousand Leave, and on tracks Female Mechanic you can see their point. Perhaps the idea had simply been to make Gordon’s vocals sound as grating as possible so that they could serve as an effective counterpoint to the stridency of the band's guitar parts -- but all too often the vocals just end up being jarring without being interesting or managing to engage. It does end up working on Ineffable Me, the punkiest thing on the album by a good country mile (the track also has the band applying effects that make their guitars sound like the Residents’ keyboards, which is actually pretty awesome and kudos).   

Of course it's a little easy to pick on Sonic Youth at this stage of their careers for coming across just a bit too comfortable. But the fact is that for all their bourgie smugness the band were still capable of creating music that you could get unreasonably excited about, as Wildflower Soul -- far and away my favourite track on A Thousand Leaves -- amply demonstrates. Wildflower Soul is a song that, once again, owes a strong debt to the Velvet Underground, but this time around Sonic Youth actually manage to take on enough of the urbanity and the unimpeachable cool which originally set those legendary Ludlow Street loft dwellers apart from so many of their successors, to make this track feel like a minor post punk triumph. The rest of the album although often very pleasant to listen to, and sometimes even positively effervescent, has nothing else to engage you as directly: nothing else that makes you want to stop what you're doing just so you can listen more attentively. Listening to their 11 minute Allen Ginsberg tribute Hits of Sunshine, for instance, is like watching a glass of a lightly carbonated artisanal lemonade fizzing away into eventual flatness on a bank holiday picnic. Kind of fun in a distracted sort of the way. At end of the day A Thousand Leaves might just be a little bit too tasteful for its own good. (6/10)