Bad Moon Rising (1985)
It was on Bad Moon Rising that the Youth's miasma of influences, from trad rock, punk and free-jazz,  began to resolve themselves into something new and distinctive and that the band began to start sounding like themselves. In fact, I got this weird impression of having heard the album before even though (I'm almost certain that) it was my first time hearing it; something which I put down to my familiarity with the rest of the band's discography, and the extent to which they were (subsequently) able to create a sound world so utterly and so unmistakably their own. Indeed SY's music has that welcome familiarity and even intimacy which only the really iconic bands seem to attain to and which eventually comes to feel so natural and spontaneous -- even if that iconic sound is still quite clearly at an embryonic stage on BMR. That the ‘Sonic Youth' sound did not come to the band spontaneously, that it would take them a fair few attempts before things finally began to click into place you only need to listen to their previous records to understand; and that it would take them a few more years to perfect you only need to compare BMR (and  its immediate successor Evol) with the masterful Sister to appreciate. Interestingly enough the album was born of a conscious attempt on the part of the band to forestall what, they feared, were the signs of an impending creative stasis -- which is rather telling if you think about it given that the Youth were still, in reality, at the very onset of their careers -- something which famously led to them to detune all their guitars in a fit of self-challenge.  
	Bad Moon Rising is a fine showcase of the progress achieved by the band in pursuit of the deeper aesthetic (and melodic) joys immanent in ear-melting guitar feedback.  The songs, tracks or pieces, whatever you want to call them, on BMR blend into each other so effectively that it's often difficult to pick individual favourites from out of the melange. That being said, however, one of my personal highlights on the album has to be the wide-eyed and evocative ‘I Love Her All the Time': a hypnotic ballad with the steady, rolling pace of an old-time train journey through the open plains and a sense of epic, cinema-scale grandeur that feels unmistakably American. (Even minus the accents, there's no way in hell that a British band could ever have come up anything of the sort; kind of like how there are no decent British road movies if you think about it.) And yet this isn't some kind of pure, ecstatic Kerouakian-On-the-Road style kick, or even, heaven forbid, an alt-1980s update on Cosmic Americana -- even if Lee Renaldo was reputed to have been a big Deadhead in his time --  instead Sonic Youth seem far more attuned to the drearier, more quotidian aspects of life in the hinterlands, something which enabled them, later on, to appeal to a  whole legion of disaffected and marginalised teenagers all across the USA and beyond. Thematically the album makes a strong nod to the transgressive/trash aesthetics that became all the rage at a certain point in the early-to-mid 80s,  although BMR's mishmash of faintly political slogans, allusions to cheap horror flicks, and pseudo-beatnik poetry comes across as pretty cosmetic: there's nothing remotely offensive or heaven forfend, genuinely transgressive, on this album. 
	All in all, and despite its importance to the evolution of the band's overall sound, Bad Moon Rising falls well short of classic status; for a start it's unable to boast of even one single future countercultural teen anthem, of the sort destined to light up the next few Sonic Youth albums (Death Valley 69 comes close, although in the final count it just seems to lack a requisite something, personality maybe). And yet, although it is low on thrills -- in comparison to what was to come that is -- BMR is by no means a lacklustre record. Instead it is a solid effort and engages throughout: the band obviously took great pleasure in coaxing those strange ringing effects from their guitars, but at the same time they have the good manners and the even better taste not to impose this new found joy on the listener's patience, nothing outstays its welcome here. Later on they would learn how to assemble these sounds together  so as to make them sound not just compelling, but positively symphonic. But for now a decent enough effort from the lads and lass. (6/10)