One of the most widely diffused and most virulent of all the great 'le wrong generation'/(dad)rockist narratives would have it that rock and pop music more or less hit their peak around 1967 -- that is, during the summer of love --  before beginning a long and tortuous decline, at first gradual, then ever more precipitous, all the way down to an all too desolate present day. You might be granted a few blippy, short term peaks and upsurges here and there, but nothing that was too antithetical to the main trend: namely, the overall tendency of things to always get worse. On the other hand, of course, there are those who go too far in the opposite direction, and the dadrocker's extremism is matched in its zeal by the poptivist's conviction that -- having made sufficient allowance for an inevitable amount of random variation -- the inherent quality of popular music has not diminished in any significant way since the early 60s. The thinking being that, since innovation is the main force and inspiration behind almost all of rock/pop's greatest moments -- and since musical and cultural innovation show no sign of abating anytime soon -- there can be no question of any but the briefest of short-term declines.
 
There are serious problems with both of these positions but the dadrocker is, in my opinion, much the wronger of the two; his  -- and let's be honest here, it's almost always a he -- dogmatic insistence on popular music's effectively monotone decline comes off the worst when faced with the only test that really counts, and that is the test of reality. Take into consideration, for example, the five year period between 1986 and 1991,  bearing in mind that by the former date the forces of degeneration had had close to two decades during which to wreak their entropic havoc. And yet those five consecutive years, that half a decade, was to witness not only one of the greatest peaks in the history of hip hop, its so-called golden age, but, crucially, it also saw the growth and the flowering of Detroit techno, arguably the most radically futuristic popular music genre of the past 50 years. Five triumphant years that were also exceptional in their impact on guitar-based rock music and saw the release of a spate of game-changing albums the likes of The Queen is Dead, Doolittle, Sign O' the Times, Loveless, and Nevermind -- each of which can more than hold its head up high in the company of such canonical 60s tour-de-forces as Revolver, Pet Sounds, Astral Weeks, or Blonde on Blonde.  Now, it would clearly be the height of absurdity for your average dadrock sectarian to try and claim that all of these releases (and note that I've only listed a few of the most important albums released during those years and none of the singles, album tracks, remixes and EPs) were nothing but flukes, and only incidental to rock's principally downward spiral -- when instead  they obviously tend towards the conclusion that in spite of the rockist's perpetual sideline grumblings popular music did, in fact, experience a very real, and very vivid upsurge in the space of those five glorious years, years that were positively teeming with felicitous cross-genre hybridizations and startling, previously undreamt of musical mutations. 

But all this is just so much scene setting, for, it was during this very same moment of frenzied cultural activity that our heroes just happened to release an album that, even in the midst of such heightened musical creativity, would stand out for its inventiveness,  its nerve and it ambition and, last but not least, for its socio-cultural resonance -- at least amongst a fairly large constituency of acne-ridden, straggly-haired and drugged-up slackers, a demographic that was becoming increasingly alienated by the yuppyish turn that the 1980s were taking. The work in question is of course 'Daydream Nation': the album which conferred the crown of true musical greatness upon the band once and for all. 

The fact is that everything about this album feels epic, everything seems to be animated by a boldness and a daring that was unprecedented for the band and that revealed the absolutely dizzying rate at which their ambition had grown in the space of only two years. You see it in the very name of the album itself and a title which carries the kind of serious poetic heft which had heretofre been lacking in the band's song and album titles (not to mention their lyrics). And then of course there's the cover artwork, featuring Gerhard Richter's by now emblematic painting of a lit candle set against a gloomy, greenish-brown background: the image offering a kind of elemental symbolic corollary to the deep feeling of elation and optimism, the ecstatic sense of “fucking the future”, that is the predominant emotional tone which characterises the album. Daydream Nation is indeed remarkable for its earnestness and its sense of optimism, something which can't but place it in direct opposition to the curdled cynicism of the prevailing (highbrow) artistic trends of the times. Granted that SY would go on to try their hand at postmodernist goofing on the Whitey Album, but on DN they're definitely wearing their hearts on their sleeves and that is an essential part of the album's appeal.  

But then, if you think back on the landmark underground (or, if you prefer, alternative) rock albums that preceded Daydream Nation and that paved the way for it --  albums such as, for instance, the Velvet Underground and Nico, Horses,  Marquee Moon, not to mention Nevermind the Bollocks and Blank Generation -- then it's clear that what made so many of those records as unpalatable as they so obviously were to mainstream tastes of the time was really the extent to which they made use of irony. And we're not just talking about any old kind of irony here, but an irony of a particularly bleak and existential sort, one that had its roots in a deeply felt nihilism (stretching back to the great literary decadents of the 19th century and Jean Arthur Rimbaud in particular) and that actually stood at odds with the cocky iconoclasm of most 60s rock and roll rebellion. This kind of caustic sensibility happens to be absolutely foreign to the wide-eyed music that Sonic Youth made.  It is also true that, spoken-word pretensions aside, Sonic Youth just never were as steeped in literature or beatnik poetry as your Patty Smiths or your Lou Reeds or any of the rest of that turtle-neck crowd. If anything they were much closer in spirit and artistic temperament to mid 20th century abstract expressionists like Jackson Pollock or Mark Rothko (though fortunately, for them, they managed to skip the whole suicidal depression and the crippling alcoholism part) -- and so cue the usual commonplace observations/platitudes about there being something essentially painterly about the music of Sonic Youth, something that readily lends itself to analogies with visual art and talk of washes of sound and of grain and texture. But it's a question of attitude too, because at the end of the day what you get with classic era Sonic Youth is the zeal and the enthusiasm, and quite often the fast playing, that characterised punk -- that direct, energetic, libidinous appeal to youthful passions -- but without any of the lowlife druggy, urbane decadence that punk had first absorbed from its embryonic New York beginnings. Sonic Youth were always way too wholesome for that. 
  
And on Daydream Nation you get that wholesome zeal in spades,  right from the get-go, from the first chiming notes that launch the overture to Teenage Riot, Sonic Youth's electrifying, blitzkrieg anthem to teenagehood that manages to rival the Who at their most grandiloquent and mythologising best, and whose potency as a Generation X call to arms would only be challenged a few years later by the youth-cultural earthquake that was Smells like Teenage Spirit.  Now a great deal of the album's propulsive force derives just from that opening track --  and more precisely from that exact instant when, post the hazy-dawn prelude and post Kim Gordon's repeated incantations of “Spirit Desire”,  the band's scorched earth guitars finally start to kick in. The forceful pace laid down by Teenage Riot is ramped up even further by Silver Rocket, the latter managing to gather itself up into a frenzied, headlong momentum before suddenly coming to an abrupt, forced halt at the crash barrier threshold, spinning parts and all -- but then it quickly picks itself up again, dusts itself down, and comes on even more furiously than before. The Sprawl is a gorgeous study in colour and texture and one that starts off fairly conventionally, with Kim Gordon half-singing, half-narrating, over guitars that are jerky and agitated, before letting everything slow down to a steady crawl, with all those layers of feedback and static gradually resolving into some drone fuelled approximation to dub reggae. It's something you find yourself returning to over and over again just to marvel at the adeptness with which the band manage to pull it all off. The whole album is like that, cycling through hot/cold extremes of speed and intensity as well as alternating between melody and just sheer white noise, but the band always do it so seamlessly and make it all look like so much child's play. I mean this is really edge of the seat stuff here, folks. How can you not thrill at the way the coruscating, kaleidoscopic guitar intro to Cross the Breeze transitions, on the back of a series of ominous, discordant guitar stabs, into a delirious fireball of energy, that rockets the track forward until the pace starts to relent once more in order to allow Kim's jeering, impudent vocals to take over from the guitars?  One of my personal highlights from the album is Hey Joni, a remorseless, unrelenting juggernaut of a piece that pits Lee Renaldo's coarse howl against some of the tightest, and most on point playing on the whole record. There's no better showcase for Sonic Youth's masterful use of melody and hooks in setting up their highly disciplined eruptions of violence -- nor of the crucial role that Steve Shelley's drumming plays in making Daydream Nation the prodigious artistic feat that it undoubtedly is.
 
The album concludes with a tripartite musical suite entitled -- appropriately enough -- the Trilogy and that, all its parts taken together, clocks in at just past the 14 minute mark, a running time which must have bewildered music critics back in the day when prog was still regarded as a filthy word and the punk aesthetics of '76 largely remained in force. The band got away with it thanks to the singular intensity of focus that they manage to sustain throughout the Trilogy, but also because, at the end of the day, it really is just three shorter tracks stitched together into one. On the other hand, given that the average track length on Daydream Nation clocks in at around 6 minutes, the decision to round off the album with a 14 minute concept-piece isn't as out of place as it might otherwise have seemed. Indeed one of Daydream Nation's greatest achievements might just lie in its successful fusion of a punk-derived noise aesthetic with what is essentially a deeply proggy musical approach -- and now that we can be adults about the whole prog thing it's probably the right time to go around shouting it from the rooftops.

A little bit of personal history here. I first heard Daydream Nation when I was at secondary school in the UK, and we're going all the way back to the mid 90s here. In fact I'd actually bought it on CD after reading an NME review of all their pre-Geffen records, which had been re-released as part of Blast First Sonic Youth reissue campaign, and which had given the album a mark of 10/10. Now it was quite rare for the NME to give out such a high mark to any record, and this immediately intrigued me (a similar thing happened to me a couple of years later when I read a 10/10 review for a CD reissue of Liberty Belle and the Black Diamond Express). Back then things seemed much more straightforward when it came to questions of genre and the categorisation of music. Sonic Youth, as everyone knew back then, were an alternative rock group in the lineage of the Velvet Underground, the Stooges, Pere Ubu and Television, but who also happened to have close affinities to Krautrock, Punk, and Noise/Experimental.  And that all seemed to make complete sense to me at the time. But then the fact is I never got round to listening to prog until much later on, indeed when I was past my mid 20s. The sad truth is that as impressionable as I was, I'd been discouraged from doing so by the hostility of the music press which, for as long as I'd been reading it (94 onwards), had always dismissed (the entirety of) prog rock as overblown and irredeemably pretentious.  But listening back to Daydream Nation now, it seems to have more of an affinity with Close to the Edge or Fragile by Yes or Red by King Crimson than either Tago Mago or the Faust Tapes (of course we shouldn't forget the group's self-admitted fondness for the Grateful Dead in this connection either). And even if that might make it less unprecedented, less sui generis but it really doesn't make it any less impressive. An essential album. (10/10)