Dirty (1992)
I'm just going to go straight ahead to the wrap-up here because I think that, in this case, the album kinds of merits it:
 
Sonic Youth's seventh album, 1992's, Dirty is just as toned down and inoffensive as its predecessor Goo, even if I would argue that overall it's slightly a better album; it is the band at their most prototypical and generic (7/10). 

OK, so now let me backtrack a little because, generic Sonic Youth is not a bad thing per se;  they were still a really good, if no longer quite a great, band. But, after the discordances and the sheer musical fecundity of the band's 1980s output seeing them settle into such a comfortable groove is disappointing to say the least -- disappointing in very large part because they were unable to compensate for their lack of daring by making their music compelling in other ways. Let me put it this way, Dirty was released a year after the epochal Loveless, and the slightly less epochal but still pretty influential, Spiderland, two albums that taking up the aesthetic and creative challenges set up by Daydream Nation managed to up the ante even further -- the former album effectively serving, a good two or three decades after the likes of Hendrix and Clapton, to completely revolutionize our understanding of the possibilities of the electric guitar as an instrument, serving to liberate musicians from the influence of prevailing rockist idioms and conventions. Meanwhile SY were content to carve out a rather less-demanding niche as a just slightly left of field indie rock group. Swept up in the grunge slipstream which they themselves had been instrumental in creating, Sonic Youth were able to set themselves apart from the younger stadium-conquering cohort like Nirvana and Pearl Jam as well as other less commercially successful groups like Pavement and Dinosaur Jr by making music that, although it was less melodically accessible than that of their peers -- though only marginally less, mind -- was able in compensation to boast heavier doses of cred-enhancing feedback as well as a few other avant garde bells and whistles here and there. In other words there's a slight whiff of superficiality about the whole business. This is not to impugn, or even to bring up the question of, the band's integrity.  I have no problem with groups trying to make their music more accessible per se, and indeed some groups end up making their best music in following that route; see for example Tim by the Replacements.  It's just that with Sonic Youth the process corresponded with them transforming into a merely very good, rather than an era-defining, band as they arguably had been just 4 years earlier.  Make no mistake Dirty is a good record, and often it's very good. But, again: once their music becomes more conventional, once you start to judge it on melodies and hooks -- rather than on tone, timbre texture or the quality of being psychologically unnerving or whatever other atypical (for rock music) criteria you want to judge it on -- then comparing Dirty with the other great 'alternative' guitar albums from the same era, e.g., Nevermind, Trompe Le Monde, Copper Blue, or  Dirt, on that basis...well let's just say that Dirty doesn't exactly shine out in comparison.  

On the other hand, and to extenuate and blunten the force of some of what I've just written, it should be pointed out that Sonic Youth, even if much less conspicuously than before, were still actively developing their sound on Dirty, and although the band's experimental impulses were considerably reigned in, their music was still original enough to help provide the blueprint for much of American indie rock in the years to come. As to the individual songs nothing is quite as immediate as the album's brilliant stand out anthem Sugar Kane. On the other hand Dirty scores fairly high when it comes to less immediate but ultimately irresistible brainworms, the best of which are the hypnotic Theresa's Soundworld, and the syrupy Chapel Hill: two songs, moreover, that hint at some of the band's artistic glories to come.  And the rating in case you missed it above is. (7/10)immediate as the album's brilliant stand out anthem Sugar Kane. On the other hand Dirty scores fairly high when it comes to less immediate but ultimately irresistible brainworms, the best of which are the hypnotic Theresa's Soundworld, and the syrupy Chapel Hill, two songs, moreover, that hint at some of the band's future artistic glories.  And the rating in case you missed it above is (7/10).