Evol (1986)
'Evol' is often regarded as Sonic Youth's first truly great LP, something that, I suspect, might have a lot to do with the record's opening song, one of those stone cold Youth teen anthems which I mentioned above, viz. the brilliant Tom Violence -- and a track that, as a song-length encapsulation of the spirit of the mid-to-late 1980s US indie scene was only really surpassed  by the band themselves on 'Schizophrenia' and 'Teenage Riot'. The initial impact of 'Tom Violence' helps to compensate for the fact that although the rest of the record is often very good, it still lacks the focused intensity and the powerful, devastating application of melody that would soon come to characterise the group at their best. (Indeed I would personally reserve first great album honours to Sister.)
  
Following up on the expansive, ghostly din of Bad Moon Rising, Evol saw the band take off on a somewhat altered tangent as they set about exploring a new loping, muscular, quasi-industrial sound, strangely redolent, in many places, of Joy Division. This was no musical dead end, though, and, in subsequent releases, that heavier low-end would serve as a sturdy rhythmic backbone to poke through the group's signature torrential washes of grey, electric feedback.  Indeed, taken together as complementary parts of a whole,  Evol and BMR,  already begin to showcase the core components of what would quickly become the familiar SY, er, sonic palette, one that the band would put to use to such devastating effect on their two albums to come.

In contrast to BMR the individual songs on Evol tend to separate themselves out quite nicely. And even if the rest of the album can't really match up to the singularity of the opener, it very rarely falls beneath the level of the intriguing. Instrument-wise, it's hard not to be drawn in by the thick, heavy bass on a track like 'Starpower', even if Kim Gordon's oh-so languid vocals are apt to lead your attention off elsewhere. There's a pointless spoken-word track, 'In the Kingdom # 19', whose instrumental backing track later transmutates into a close approximation of Glam rock. 'Death to our Friends' has that screeching banshee-guitar lead-in that would soon become a signature Sonic Youth move, but like a nervous teenage lover it climaxes just a little too early, leaving you both disappointed and hungry for more. On 'Secret Girl', the band try something slightly different and it works amazingly well: a series of disconcerting thuds, squeaks and tremors that resolves itself into an eerie piano-led psychodrama that beautifully showcases Kim Gordon's icy vocal delivery (I mean this is really Kim's album). Truly a band on the threshold of greatness. (7/10)