Experimental Jet Set, Trash and No Star(1994)
1994 must have been a strange year for Sonic Youth. The band found themselves at the tail end of grunge, the movement that they had been instrumental in creating, and which, from reasonably humble beginnings, had subsequently gone on to conquer the world. Careerwise, they had outlasted two whole generations of their peers, and reached the point where the “youth” part of their name could only be understood ironically. And in strong contrast to the parlous physical and moral status of so many of those aforesaid peers -- the result of epic, horrorshow levels of drug and alcohol consumption coupled with excessively nihilistic emotional propensities -- Sonic Youth were still going strong, and showed no clear signs of wear and tear -- which probably explains why in the following year, 1995, they were able to release the brilliant Washing Machine, one of their strongest albums to date. In 1994, however, they put out the rather less impressive Experimental Jet Set, Trash and No Star, a record that has, quite justly, gone down as one of the most disappointing and underwhelming in their lengthy discography, although top place (or rather bottom place) honours in that respect should certainly go to 2000's NYC Ghosts and Flowers. And since Sonic Youth were constitutionally incapable of releasing a terrible record, Experimental Jet Set, Trash and No Star is not really a bad record. It's just that like its two immediate predecessors it has a tendency to be just a little bit on the wrong side of, you know, ho-hum.

One thing should be cleared up before everything else however. 'Experimental' might be the first word of the album's title, but EJSTNS isn't any more avant-garde or any more innovative than their other 90's output, superficially at least: there's little in the way of screeching dissonance or crushing atonal feedback on offer here. In fact on initial impressions EJSTNS comes across like an album of rather prosaic Dirty off-cuts,  something you might find on the second disc of a deluxe 25th year anniversary Dirty reissue. And yet listen closely enough and you can start to pick out a sense that underneath that surface torpor things were beginning to move off in a more interesting direction after the stasis of Dirty and Goo -- although in a way that only became fully apparent on Washing Machine. EJSTNS can be viewed as the point when the band's avid consumption, and appreciation, of hip hop and mainstream pop music, alongside Krautrock bands like Neu! and Can, begins to really shine through in their music -- shine through in an organic way that is and not just as part of a half-ironic put on like on the Whitey Album. At the same the group was also starting to explore more gentler, folkier ground as testified by the album's opening track, a stripped down little blues number that features Thurston's vocals at their most hopelessly bratty. 

In the end EJSTNS is essentially just a sketchbook of truncated though oftentimes meandering, guitar pieces with a sustained emphasis on low end frequencies -- and a much lighter emphasis on the feedback baptismals of days gone by. The second track, chiming  nursery rhyme take-off Bull in the Heather, features some splendid vocals from Kim and indeed proves to an early highlight. But then the rest has a tendency to pass you by like so much aural wallpaper -- until, that is, you get to the rude awakening of Self-Obsessed and Sexxee, both of which showcase the band at their most frustratingly, needlessly, self-parodic. Luckily, they manage to get their shit together on the next track, Bone: a fragile piece of music that recalls the Velvet Underground at their most vulnerable and androgynous.  And yet so much of the album is colourless with the sense of boredom becoming almost glaring on tracks like Waist. Listen to the album enough times though, and once you've overcome the boredom factor, you too might begin to appreciate the subtler delights of the likes of Quest for the Cup or the wistful Sweet Shine. So that although it's not 5 or 4 stars, it's still exceedingly far from being no stars at all (6/10).   
