Goo(1990)
So that having released an absolute tour de force of an album -- a classic that not only served to put the band's reputation permanently beyond dispute, but one that would prove to be a seminal influence in the further evolution of late 20th century guitar music  -- Sonic Youth were, arguably, entitled to rest on their laurels for a spell; Christ, with Daydream Nation and Sister under their belts, they could be easily forgiven even the unholy pisstake of the Whitey Album.  And moreover, it would be difficult to begrudge any band of Sonic Youth's stature the decision to pursue a more commercial direction and to thereby cash in on all the hard work and creative toil (almost a decade's worth in the Youth's case) which they had invested in their music up till then (hard for me to begrudge at least -- but then I belong to the non-purist school of music fandom and have no qualms with bands selling out especially if it leads to an overall improvement in musical output -- which, alas, it so rarely does). This (the pursuit of a more commercial direction) was what in fact transpired when, on the cusp of a new decade, the group decided to sign their first major label deal with David Geffen Records before going on to release their most commercial album to date, 1990's Goo -- the former event, lest we forget,  leading in 1991 to Geffen's signing of Nirvana which of course triggered off the whole grunge movement. And the rest, as they are so wont to say, is history.


Before going on to discuss how Goo stacks up musicwise, however, it is worth taking some time out to admire the group's fantastic choice of (soon to be iconic) cover art. Indeed Goo's bold pop art inspired cover has a lot in common with the Whitey Album and its Warholian visual approach, and as with the Whitey Album those arresting visual aesthetics turn out to be maybe a wee bit over effective, setting up the sort of, reasonably lofty, expectations that the music itself falls frustratingly short of.  Because the bad news is that, numerous caveats aside, Goo would turn out to be Sonic Youth's most lacklustre album to date -- with the biggest caveat relating to the unavoidable difficulty of separating the listener's sense of dissatisfaction with the album from the hyper-inflated expectations which the band themselves had built up over the course of their discography, and especially with their last two official releases. The fact is, though, that even if Goo lacks the rawness, the furious buzz and crackle, of their earliest stuff not to say the intense inventiveness of Sister and Daydream Nation, it is far from a bad album, indeed it's only one letter away from being good. Believe me, any album that can boast the likes of Dirty Boots, Tunic (Song for Karen), Mote and Cinderella's Big Score has to have a hell of a lot going for it with Cinderella's Big Score in particular being one of the best songs the band ever wrote.   At the end of the day it's a case of the over-smothering tendencies of the production rendering every single fucking thing far more tasteful than it should really by rights be, (on a Sonic Youth album at least), than the actual songs themselves call for. And even those patented SY guitar breakdowns so exhilarating on the band's previous records seem to be largely drained of spontaneity here. More broadly speaking, then, what really lets Goo down is a certain sensation of egregiousness: the suspicion (perhaps unfair) that Sonic Youth aren't even trying to disguise the extent to which they've toned down their sound to reach a more mainstream audience. Something which, in the group's defense, might have been due to a feeling of a creative burn-out a result to the intense, sustained and freeform effort which had gone into the group's past releases.  Whatever the reasons, Goo was the album which saw the band finally let their sensible side (always somewhat present on the sidelines) take over completely. [Slight disclaimer: maybe some of my issues with the album are due to my having heard more impressive live versions of a lot of these songs on a 1993 bootleg Energy years before I heard Goo itself. Maybe if I'd heard Goo first I'd have liked it a lot more.]  In spite of its merits then the album seemed to be a sign that Sonic Youth's avant-reign was over, at least for the time being.  (7/10)