NYC Ghosts and Flowers (2000)
The dawn of the new millennium was to see the release of Sonic Youth's 11th studio album (or 12th if you count the Whitey album, which I personally don't) 'NYC Ghosts and Flowers' -- a rather poignant sounding title and which I had always assumed was a reference to the events of 9/11, but in fact the record was actually released the year before. Anyway, the period around the turn of the millennium was undoubtedly a fruitful one for the group, who, along with their  'main' studio albums kept themselves busy by putting out SYR records. So that if you were a fan of Sonic Youth back then it must have felt like something of a boom period -- at least in terms of the quantity of material released and not necessarily in terms of quality. But, returning to the record at hand. The birth of 'NYC Ghosts and Flowers' was not an easy one, and took place under something of a cloud. For it just so happened that the year before the album's release the band had had all their equipment and instruments stolen from a touring van outside their hotel,  an event that -- given Sonic Youth's well known reliance on their stock of specially modified guitars -- had a profound effect both on their sound as well as their morale. In interviews around the time of the album's release the band would avow that the theft had led them to completely rethink their whole musical approach and in essence to start all over again. However that seems somewhat drastic to me, since, to be honest, I can't really hear any really *profound* break in continuity between this album and its predecessor, and both are clearly products of the group's more sedate, digressive latter phase. Doubtless a certain lack of rapport between the band and their new or borrowed equipment might help to explain NYCGF's unprecedented (and frankly uncalled for) emphasis on spoken word, the band's disconcerting eagerness to break out into beatnik poetry as if it was a nappy rash or a particularly aggressive case of vaginal thrush. 

NYCGF is generally regarded as one of the weakest and more underwhelming entries in the Sonic Youth discography, and I honestly cannot disagree with that estimate.  But let's get something straight here: a dreary Sonic Youth record is still better than anything most other bands manage ever to put out over the course of their entire miserable careers. And even if the record does essentially pass you by, it does so in that clever way that Sonic Youth's late period records have, convincing you to endure the colourlessness and monotony of their hookless boho doodling with the lure of something more pleasurable to come -- and because that monotony, despite its relative blandness, is still engaging enough to tide you over,  it doesn't feel like you're being shortchanged. In other words the anticipation keeps you going. The difference on NYCGF is that unlike their other releases -- where you'd always end up coming away with a veritable diamond or three for your troubles -- this time around they never actually end up delivering; and so you're left there, waiting for the pay off, just as the album ends, which it does, it feels like, prematurely. Nonetheless, NYCGF does have its flashes of inspiration if not brilliance: Free City Rhymes and StreamXSonic Subway (and there's that weird Residents influence popping up again when you least expect it) turn out to be pretty good. All in all, if I was to describe NYCGF in one word it would be 'dwindling'. (5/10)