Rather Ripped (2006)
And so we move on to Sonic Youth's 14th album and, in fact, their penultimate long player release as a band, 2006's Rather Ripped: a record that, speaking purely in terms of banal chronology, was to signal the end both of Jim O'Rourke's brief tenure as bass player, as well as the group's significantly longer and definitely more iconic association with Geffen records. Musically, Rather Ripped has the reputation of being one of the band’s most accessible albums, and it’s a reputation that’s largely deserved as far as it goes, given its much greater focus on songcraft in contrast to its predecessors. At the same time, though, I think that that ultimately misses out on what really sets the album apart in the context of Sonic Youth's wider discography, and that is, in a couple of words: heart and tenderness. Trust me friends, the feels are strong on this one. Rather Ripped is an album shot through with longing for the past, with an often overwhelming sense of nostalgia and wistfulness -- all of which seems a bit strange for a band that for most of its history seemed to find its raison d’etre in the need to experiment and to push the envelope musically, and which in consequence seemed to be inherently anti-nostalgic.  Interestingly though, it’s not so much Sonic Youth's own musical past to which the band fix their collective affectionate gaze on Rather Ripped -- I mean this is not a noisefest revival of Kill Yr Idols or Confusion is Sex, well, not till we get to Helen Lundeberg anyway, and neither is it in any simple sense a revisitation of Sister or Daydream Nation -- rather that gaze takes in the whole post-punk musical milieu in which the band came of age, continued on into maturity, and were then able to stroll towards a comfortable middle age (or so it seemed back then, Thurston's libido proving otherwise). Listen out in particular for the influence of REM on Rather Ripped. It’s something that tends to creep up on you throughout the album: like staring up into the sky and suddenly realising that the clouds have formed themselves into familiar shapes without you even noticing. The band clearly saw the record as an opportunity to bring their strong music geek/fanboy(girl) tendencies to the fore; tendencies that had, by that point, been deeply coloured by three decades or so worth of personal recollection and the bittersweet remembrances of those of their peers who never made it out the other side -- which explains why its celebratory tone is so muted.  

Now, there’s a certain, cynical, school of thought that views Sonic Youth as the ultimate in calculating scenesters, and which would happily dismiss the album’s overt sentimentality as just another phoney move. But Rather Ripped feels genuine to me, revealing the kinds of emotional depth that the band evinced only sporadically on their previous records. Even so, it is perhaps true that as a result of the band's more conventionally song driven approach on Rather Ripped, you do get the sense that, after 30 years of proud and unstinting waywardness, that, *shock horror* Sonic Youth's guitars have been finally and definitively tamed. And that will have, understandably, alienated a good portion of the faithful. On the flipside, and in stark contrast to the albums immediately prior to it -- with which Rather Ripped shares a similarly lackadaisical, understated feel -- Rather Ripped manages to maintain a coherence, a musical center of gravity that was sorely lacking in those former albums, and this makes even the usually exasperating SY filler tolerable.

Sad to report then that the band were unable to come up with anything better than the underwhelming Reena to start proceedings off with. Luckily they redeem themselves straight away with the second track, Incinerate, which, with its nagging Dinosaur Jr-esque guitar figure sets the world weary tone for the rest of the album to come: the vocals a little heavier, the delivery noticeably more slurred than usual. Twinkly guitar harmonics frame the pointillistic white boy --  or let’s be honest, middle aged white man -- blues of Do You Believe in Rapture, offering Thurston a perfect setting to explore the enhanced possibilities of age weathered vocals for gravitas. Jams Run Free, on the other hand, takes up the Neu!-centric obsession of former years and gives it a nice, shiny, metallic coating, while, at the same time refusing to cross the 4 minute mark, as the band had been so often wont to do on similar tracks in the past. Rats is puffy bluster; Turquoise Boy’s pulls back its veil of sadness to reveal a hidden strength and muscularity. 

Rather Ripped signalled a softening of the band’s former emotional frigidity in favour of openness, vulnerability and a burgeoning appreciation of affect; this was a group more in touch with its shadow side than it had ever been willing to let on before. And it’s unmistakable on a track like Lights Out, one of the most sombre things the band had ever released, or on Neutral,  which features the album’s single most spine-tingling moment.  It comes partway through the song as the guitars and the drums fade out and Kim Gordon continues to sing, leaving her icy vocals (eerily reminiscent of Nico at her most haughty and most detached) isolated save for the accompaniment of a simple bass motif that turns out to be just the melody of Love Will Tear Us Apart by Joy Division. It is a perfectly judged moment -- the most perfectly judged moment on the record --  and one which the listener is led towards with care and consummate skill. Pink Steam gets teary eyed midway through its seven minute length, a couple of minutes before Moore’s forlorn vocals kick in.  Or’s suburban Heart of Darkness sets up a chunky, dubby, vaguely tribal rhythm and borrows a guitar motif from the End by the Doors, all to suitably sinister effect. Things start getting punchier towards the end, on the final two tracks, with the No Wave rehash of Helen Lundeberg’s No Wave, and Thurston Moore’s ornery rant Eyeliner. 

The album undoubtedly breaks very little ground sound wise -- unless you count the group’s newfound readiness to incorporate explicit musical references and borrowed motifs into their music -- which was a canny move, truth be told, given the 00’s strong plunderphonic/retrogasmic turn. It did demonstrate however that Sonic Youth were more than capable of making music that was accessible and even reasonably radio friendly but without sounding contrived or overly polished as had been the case, alas, with their grunge-era Geffen stuff.  Rather Ripped really is a striking album, and one of the group’s greatest artistic successes to my mind. It would have been a great note for the band to end on; a strong finish to a remarkable career (although the better outcome would obviously have been for them to continue making albums of the same standard as this).  But no, they only had to go and mess it up again didn’t they.  
 (8/10)