Sister(1987)
After years of releasing records that, though, they wanted for little in terms of creativity and inventiveness, always felt somewhat awkward and transitional, Sonic Youth finally managed to hit artistic paydirt with 1987's 'Sister', an album that cemented their reputation as one of the greatest new American guitar bands since Television. 'Sister' is the 'Rubber Soul' to 'Daydream Nation''s 'Revolver'-- or the 'Revolver' to 'Daydream Nation''s 'Sgt Pepper' depending on your personal preference in Beatles' albums . It is the work of a group who, having spent the best part of a decade carefully, meticulously, fashioning their own unique, feedback-driven sound -- and concomitantly creating an audience for that sound through a relentless touring schedule that took in both Europe as well as America -- were gradually starting to approach the height of their powers and to achieve a level of creative mastery that would catapult them far beyond the reach of most of their other musical peers (at least for a couple of years or so). This hard-won proficiency allowed the band to strike upon, and to maintain, a careful balance between the tortured physicality of the sound, its sheer presence -- the screeching dissonance and the buzzing crystalline static -- and the group's relatively newfound pop-nous, those melodic instincts that had been more or less bubbling away under the surface on their previous records -- to maintain it, moreover, through the course of an entire, close to 40 minute long, album that aside from a few moments of slack, turns out to be a consistently spectacular hybrid noisebloom (to appropriate the title of a 90s Merzbow album). Because it wasn't just a case of draping what turn out (after you switch the lights back on) to be a set of fairly conventional rock tunes in a layer of fuzzed out feedback, a la Jesus and Mary Chain; instead those spectacular gusts of noise make up a integral part of the DNA of each song and constitute a genuine evolution in the sound.

The group prove themselves particularly adept with respect to pace and dynamics, and are seemingly incapable of putting a foot wrong -- well, almost,  they kind of drop the ball with the third song.  That is, after starting the album off with Schizophrenia and Catholic Block, a punishing one-two combo that lends the mightiest of thrusts to proceedings, without warning, the energy levels suddenly, precipitously, plummet on Beauty Lies in the Eye -- not a bad song in itself, by any means, but everything just suddenly, infelicitously, starts to flag.  Nevermind though because things pick up immediately afterwards on Stereo Sanctity and the band don't make the same misstep twice. The rest of Sister is faultless in its segues and in the contrasts it offers in terms of pace, feeling, and texture. 

As to individual highlights, the first two have already been mentioned:  Schizophrenia and Catholic Block, the angsty, chiming earworm of the former and the furious, jeering bluster of the latter are two essential touchstones of alternative rock in the the late 80s and early 90s and must easily count as amongst the band's very best. Both songs resume SY's past lyrical obsession with youthful disaffection though this time round there's an added urgency and conviction. Elsewhere, the band's roused-up beeswarm guitar is put to blissful effect, working up a savage, nervy storm on tracks like Stereo Sanctity, Pipelink and Pacific-Kill Time. The incandescent Tuff Gnarl and the acid-tongued Pacific Coast Highway sound like the kind of thing that may well once have been punk's next great guitar-based leap forward if anyone prior to SY had had the talent, the guts and imagination to ever actually go there. The latter in particular manages to pack an inordinate number of musical ideas along with a finely worked out sense of emotive progression within its relatively brief span of 4 minutes and 17 seconds. White Cross is raw, lacerating, and unreasonably exciting. In fact that's a great way to describe the whole album: unreasonably exciting. Easily one of the album-length highlights of 80's guitar music (9/10).