Sonic Nurse (2004)
Look I’m just going to go ahead and call this a return to form for the band, that is, at least as far as Sonic Youth's proficiency with the album format was concerned. The qualification is somewhat necessary since Sonic Youth never really lost the capacity for greatness at an individual, track level, even when it looked like they no longer had it in them to make a truly satisfying album.  I suspect the flatness of their late 90s and early 00s output was a byproduct of a conscious decision, post-Dirty, to move away from the 
more traditionalist rock dynamics that had formerly underpinned their music and had served as a familiar point of departure for their protracted feedback explorations, and towards a freer, more open-ended approach.  And to be fair that turn towards the amorphous did sometimes make, as I said above, for great individual tracks, although never for really satisfying albums. It comes as little surprise therefore that the group’s best LP since Washing Machine also happens to be their most song-oriented LP since Washing Machine.  What was behind the renewed appreciation for conventional form I can only speculate. Perhaps the band had finally gotten over the need, seemingly so pressing at the turn of the millennium, to seek further artistic validation by aligning themselves with the musical avant garde. After all they had already gained their experimental chops with Goodbye 20th century and countless other side projects with random outsider freaks and outre bods -- and had even gone as far as drafting experimental eejit Jim O’Rourke into the band. 

Sonic Nurse also happens to be a watershed in my own personal appreciation of the band. And in fact it was the album that got me back into them again after years of dismissing their post-Washing Machine output as largely subpar (an assessment, admittedly, that was almost entirely based on reviews and verbal accounts of their music rather than on the actual the music itself). In truth it was a chance discovery, an appeal to my miserliness, that reignited my interest in Sonic Youth. It so happened that I found the CD in a record store one day going for an absolute pittance due to its case having being lost  -- the only packaging was a plain white cardboard sleeve with the albun title scrawled on the front in blue biro -- and thought, well, why not? But having come to Sonic Nurse with moderately low expectations, I ended up being quite impressed by the album over the course of the first few listens, and especially with the album’s triumphant opening track 'Pattern Recognition’, still my favourite thing on it. Fast forward a few years later to the present day, and the album has undoubtedly lost some of its original sheen for me. Nonetheless, I still find it to be an engaging piece of work from start to finish: one of those reliable standbys for when you want to just leave a whole album running on in the background as you go off to chop vegetables or to scour the bathtub. In terms of highlights, I've already mentioned 'Pattern Recognition’, and to those I can add 'Dude Ranch Nurse','New Hampshire', 'Paper Cup Exit', and 'I Love You Golden Blue'. Finally, it's interesting to note, now the band had decided to be a bit more upfront with regards to their several debts to Classic Rock, how large the spector of Neil Young looms on the album and particularly on its best songs.  Kudos to the old, trembly voiced canuck is all I can say. (7/10)
