The Eternal(2009)
Did the world really need a new Sonic Youth album in 2009? The excellent Rather Ripped would seem to suggest that, yes, perhaps it rather did. Surprisingly enough, and for the first time in their career, the wider American public was in agreement too and the album which the band did in fact end up releasing that year, the Eternal, would turn out to be their biggest selling album in the US ever.  It also happens to be their last proper studio album.  And well...it’s OK. Admittedly there’s some nice tracks on here, and even if you can never really shake off the sense of a band essentially cruising along on full autopilot, Sonic Youth are still able to convey a feeling of vigour and energy that would be to the credit of a band 20 or 30 years younger than they.  Despite the presence of some very impressive playing on the album, the Eternal skirts far too close to mediocrity to really convince anyone -- aside of course from the usual out of touch music critics, perennial enablers and incentivisers of mediocrity, who for some reason were utterly convinced this was absolutely a wonderful return to form for the band -- that the world actually needed a follow up to the excellent Rather Ripped after all. 

The Eternal is a solid album, but solid as in mundane and predictable, solid in a way that ends up acting like prophylactic against the novelty and the mutancy that rock music actually used to thrive upon. In reality the mid to late 2000s were the twilight for the sort of itchy, iconoclastic energy which had inflected post war youth culture from the very beginning of Rock n’ Roll as a music form and eventual memetic craze, and which in its late 70s no wave-noise mutation had spurred Sonic Youth on at the very beginning of their careers, carrying them all the way to the cusp of the new millennium, after which they began to flounder. Rather Ripped showed how you could make compelling music somewhat outside of that attitudinal framework, music that was middle aged without being dull or respectable. The Eternal in contrast sounds a bit lost and unfocused and the songs are mostly forgettable. Partial exceptions include Poison Arrow, Antennae, Massage the History, but I find it hard to summon up very much enthusiasm for those either. Not much of a swansong I'm afraid.
(5/10) 