Washing Machine (1995)
It's strange that Sonic Youth should name their 1995 follow up to 'Experimental Jet Set, Trash and No Star' after the humble washing machine when 'Refrigerator' would surely have been a far more appropriate title. You see 'Washing Machine' finds the band deep in the midst of a full-on love affair with the drone, and of course washing machines, with all their rattling and their suggestive climaxing, tend to be a bit too distracting for the true drone aficionado.  Even more worthy of note than the group's choice of title, however, was the fact that, three filler-heavy LP's and a dull novelty album into their post Daydream Nation career, Sonic Youth had once again managed to hit that artistic sweet spot and to sustain it over the length of a whole album. And in the same way that listening to some of the group's earlier, pre-Sister, material you were quite often struck by the uncanny (and slightly unexpected) similarity to the music of Joy Division, so it is that Washing Machine frequently seems to echo and to fall in line with the steady motorik progressions of Neu!'s first three albums. That the latter were a source of musical inspiration for the group can be easily gleaned from The Whitey Album where one of the tracks, the one entitled, surprise, surprise, 'Two Cool Rock Chicks Listening to Neu', literally consists of a faux audio verite field recording of the two titular chicks nattering away over the top of an imitation Neu! background track. And I don't think it's pushing it too much to read something significant into the fact that the band's most direct reference to the great Kosmische drone-rock pioneers was released as part of their half-serious, half-pisstake homage to Madonna and more generally to 80s pop as a whole. For Sonic Youth had understood -- and they were far from the only ones -- that the music of Neu! offered guitar-centric rock bands a crucial insight into how to acknowledge and respond to the rapid sonic and aesthetic advances that had been made in popular music from the 80s onwards on the basis of the repetition and the monotony of electric drum beats, without, that is, having to put their guitars away and take up samplers and drum machines. Not that Neu! were their only influences in this regard -- you can easily add Suicide, Faust, Can, etc, to the roll call -- and neither is the Neu-influence always that blatant or present on every track; nevertheless that band's influence does feel central to this record.  And even if  Sonic Youth were far from newcomers to the drone game Washing Machine still seemed to signal a much deeper appreciation on the part of the band of the use of repetition. But then again it was something that was very much in the air at the time. The term 'post rock' which  had been coined by Simon Reynolds only the year before to describe Bark Psychosis's masterpiece Hex, was rapidly being taken up by music journos eager to give a name to the sort of electronica-indie rock cross-hybridization that was starting to become hip thanks to bands such as Tortoise and Fridge. Krautrock was also back in vogue, big time, with Neu! and Can being regularly name-dropped in the pages of the mid-90s weekly music press. 
	Musically Washing Machine was also significant for the fact that it represented a definitive -- and to my mind welcome -- move away from the staid, more commercial waters in which the band had been stranded, had in fact stranded themselves, since the beginning of the 1990s. For whatever reason Sonic Youth's mainstream flirtations had finally come to a halt and their music correspondingly began to swell out and lose much of its corporeality and rockist solidity. Indeed you only need to take a glance at Washing Machine's prog-like track durations to be able to grasp the turn that things had taken: 9'33'' for the eponymous Washing Machine, 6'22'' for the gorgeous Unwind, and almost 20 minutes for the Diamond Sea: something that it's interesting to contrast with the truncated feel of the songs on 'Experimental Jet Set, Trash and No Star'. 
	Washing Machine opens with one of the group's strongest ever nods to hip-hop, Becuz, a track which while it doesn't pack the same level of dazzle as previous opening salvoes Teenage Riot and Schizophrenia, is still a pretty startling way to begin an album. Gordon's leering, cartoonish vocals, caricaturing the wired-up and aggressive masculinity of so much 90's era hip hop, ring out over a brutal multi-pronged guitar assault that comes across like a pitched riot of triangles and star polygons. On third track Saucer-like they sound like a different band altogether, something that can be largely attributed to Lee Renaldo's vocals which carry an earthiness, a stolidity, that stands totally at odds with the usual giddier, often juvenile, vocal stylings of Gordon and Moore; they lend the song an earnestness that beautifully complements its simple, touching melody. And in this regard it's interesting to note that Washing Machine sees Sonic Youth in a far more contemplative mood than on previous albums; musically this manifests itself in a sort of restraint and, even, a lightness of touch that was relatively new for the band -- but the drones though, you can never get away from the fucking drones.  And indeed on the next track, the 9 (and a half) minute long wonder, Washing Machine, the drones stage an impatient, and furious takeover. 
	And that's one thing, but then suddenly, and for the duration of the next two tracks, the album swerves off into much more self-consciously psycho-dramatic territory. Unwind is a slow slide into a warm bath of childhood nostalgia. It also feels like the band's attempt at a Sonic Youth lullaby, which it quite likely was given that Kim and Thurston had only just become parents for the first time. Little Trouble Girl continues the theme of remembrance of things past but ends up being a far more unsettling proposition: taking the tenderness and the wistfulness of Unwind and watching it languish and curdle away in some forlorn corner of an abandoned institute for the mentally infirm, the echoes of long-forgotten 60s girl group heard through the crumbling white corridors.  Now normally both of these tracks would have merited a few more words of praise apiece, but they had the misfortune of coming before one of Sonic Youth's best songs, like, ever: 'No Queen Blues'. The contrast here is somewhat glaring. It's the difference between music that's appealing intellectually and in a somewhat chin-strokish manner -- and music that just straight out fucking rocks, that screams out for your immediate allegiance in an 'our band could be your life' kind of way. 
	'No Queen Blues' might not really stick out that much from the rest of Washing Machine, at first. But when your brain does eventually come round, and boy does it ever, the track quickly becomes the irresistible focus of the whole second half of the album-- and maybe even of the entire record. 'No Queen Blues' sees the band finally able to recapture the raw energy of their earlier stuff, the edge that had been so conspicuously absent from their post-Geffen output,  but without -- and despite Thurston's vocals sounding as snotty as ever -- for a moment feeling even remotely derivative of the past.  Look, the rest of the album that follows, including the notorious bleary eyed musical leviathan, the Diamond Sea, are fine and all -- and don't misunderstand me here, the band definitely deserve kudos for pulling off the latter, 20 whole minutes of wispy feedback to which no one has ever felt the need to attach the qualifying adjective 'notorious' -- but there's nothing that engages and enlivens you quite like 'No Queen Blues'(and realise that it took quite a bit of effort and willpower on my part not to continually skip back to it while I was listening to Washing Machine for the purposes of reviewing). 
	All in all the work of a band that found itself returning tantalisingly close to the peak of its powers. (9/10)